feat(new): Add documentation for the tech preview of intelligent query rewriting (#408)
vectara/vectara-docs: www/docs/search-and-retrieval/intelligent-query-rewriting.md

---
id: intelligent-query-rewriting
title: Intelligent Query Rewriting
sidebar_label: Intelligent Query Rewriting
---

import {Config} from '@site/docs/definitions.md';

Many datasets contain filterable metadata that can improve search relevance, 
but users often lack knowledge of these metadata structures, or how to 

> apply filters effectively. The beta release of Intelligent Query Rewriting 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
apply filters effectively. The tech preview release of Intelligent Query Rewriting 
```

non-blocking: beta -> tech preview

metadata filters manually.

For example, a user searches for `“What was Apple’s revenue last year?”`, and Intelligent 
Query Rewriting automatically generates a filter like 
`doc.ticker = 'aapl' AND doc.year = 2023` to refine the search results. 

## Enable intelligent query rewriting

You enable intelligent query rewriting on a per-query basis by setting the 
`intelligent_query_rewriting` parameter to `true` in the search request. This 
allows you to have flexible control over applying this capability.

### Supported API endpoints (beta)

* [Simple Single Corpus Query](/docs/rest-api/search-corpus). Set the 
  `intelligent_query_rewriting` parameter in the query string. For other endpoints, 
  include it in the request body.
* [Advanced Single Corpus Query](/docs/rest-api/query-corpus)
* [Multiple Corpora Query](/docs/rest-api/query)
* [Start a Chat](/docs/rest-api/create-chat)
* [Create Chat Turn](/docs/rest-api/create-chat-turn)

## Example intelligent query rewriting

Consider a corpus containing movie data with the metadata filter attribute:

`doc.production_country` (Text)

1. A user submits the following query:

>   `What are some highest grossing movies made in US, UK, or India?`

Reviewer 2: nit: probably more structurally correct to say `What are some of the highest grossing movies made in US, UK, or India?`

> 2. Query Intelligence processes the query by extracting the following metadata 

Reviewer 2: Intelligent Query Rewriting

filters:

  `doc.production_country IN ('United States of America', 'United Kingdom', 'India')`

3. Rephrasing the query removes the filter context:

>   `What are some highest grossing movies?`

Reviewer 2: `What are some of the highest grossing movies`

### Example request
```json
{

>   "query": "What are some highest grossing movies made in US, UK, or India?",

Reviewer 2: same about the structure

  "intelligent_query_rewriting": true,
  "corpora": [
    {
      "corpus_key": "movie_database"
    }
  ]
}  
```
### Example response

```json
{
	  ...
	  "rewritten_queries": [
	    {
	      "corpus_key": "my_corpus",
	      "filter_extraction": {

> 	        "query": "What are some highest grossing movies?",

Reviewer 2: same about the structure
